---
assignee: Soc
end page: 468 (half way)
labels: ''
line end: which is divorced
line start: let us talk
priority: critical
related: ''
reporter: Phaedr
resolution: unresolved
start page: '467'
status: ''
t_num: '260'
tbody: 'hey socrates can you work with Phaedrus on this? '
tickettype: story
title: the rules of writing and speech
---

Phaedr. Let us talk. 

Soc. Shall we discuss the rules of writing and speech as we were 
proposing?

Phaedr. Very good. 

Soc. In good speaking should not the mind of the speaker know the
truth of the matter about which he is going to speak? 

Phaedr. And yet, Socrates, I have heard that he who would be an orator
has nothing to do with true justice, but only with that which is likely
to be approved by the many who sit in judgment; nor with the truly
good or honourable, but only with opinion about them, and that from
opinion comes persuasion, and not from the truth. 

Soc. The words of the wise are not to be set aside; for there is 
probably
something in them; and therefore the meaning of this saying is not
hastily to be dismissed. 

Phaedr. Very true. 

Soc. Let us put the matter thus:-Suppose that I persuaded you to buy
a horse and go to the wars. Neither of us knew what a horse was like,
but I knew that you believed a horse to be of tame animals the one
which has the longest ears. 

Phaedr. That would be ridiculous. 

Soc. There is something more ridiculous coming:-Suppose, further,
that in sober earnest I, having persuaded you of this, went and composed
a speech in honour of an ass, whom I entitled a horse beginning: "A
noble animal and a most useful possession, especially in war, and
you may get on his back and fight, and he will carry baggage or 
anything."

Phaedr. How ridiculous! 

Soc. Ridiculous! Yes; but is not even a ridiculous friend better than
a cunning enemy? 

Phaedr. Certainly. 

Soc. And when the orator instead of putting an ass in the place of
a horse puts good for evil being himself as ignorant of their true
nature as the city on which he imposes is ignorant; and having studied
the notions of the multitude, falsely persuades them not about "the
shadow of an ass," which he confounds with a horse, but about good
which he confounds with evily-what will be the harvest which rhetoric
will be likely to gather after the sowing of that seed? 

Phaedr. The reverse of good. 

Soc. But perhaps rhetoric has been getting too roughly handled by
us, and she might answer: What amazing nonsense you are talking! As
if I forced any man to learn to speak in ignorance of the truth! 
Whatever
my advice may be worth, I should have told him to arrive at the truth
first, and then come to me. At the same time I boldly assert that
mere knowledge of the truth will not give you the art of persuasion.

Phaedr. There is reason in the lady's defence of herself.

Soc. Quite true; if only the other arguments which remain to be brought
up bear her witness that she is an art at all. But I seem to hear
them arraying themselves on the opposite side, declaring that she
speaks falsely, and that rhetoric is a mere routine and trick, not
an art. Lo! a Spartan appears, and says that there never is nor ever
will be a real art of speaking which is divorced from the truth.