---
assignee: Soc
end page: '469'
labels: ''
line end: very true
line start: and what are these arguements
priority: major
related: ''
reporter: Phaedr
resolution: unresolved
start page: '468'
status: ''
t_num: '261'
tbody: ''
tickettype: issue
title: rhetoric an art of enchantment
---

Phaedr. And what are these arguments, Socrates? Bring them out that
we may examine them. 

Soc. Come out, fair children, and convince Phaedrus, who is the father
of similar beauties, that he will never be able to speak about anything
as he ought to speak unless he have a knowledge of philosophy. And
let Phaedrus answer you. 

Phaedr. Put the question. 

Soc. Is not rhetoric, taken generally, a universal art of enchanting
the mind by arguments; which is practised not only in courts and public
assemblies, but in private houses also, having to do with all matters,
great as well as small, good and bad alike, and is in all equally
right, and equally to be esteemed-that is what you have heard?

Phaedr. Nay, not exactly that; I should say rather that I have heard
the art confined to speaking and writing in lawsuits, and to speaking
in public assemblies-not extended farther. 

Soc. Then I suppose that you have only heard of the rhetoric of Nestor
and Odysseus, which they composed in their leisure hours when at Troy,
and never of the rhetoric of Palamedes? 

Phaedr. No more than of Nestor and Odysseus, unless Gorgias is your
Nestor, and Thrasymachus or Theodorus your Odysseus. 

Soc. Perhaps that is my meaning. But let us leave them. And do you
tell me, instead, what are plaintiff and defendant doing in a law
court-are they not contending? 

Phaedr. Exactly so. 

Soc. About the just and unjust-that is the matter in dispute?

Phaedr. Yes. 

Soc. And a professor of the art will make the same thing appear to
the same persons to be at one time just, at another time, if he is
so inclined, to be unjust? 

Phaedr. Exactly. 

Soc. And when he speaks in the assembly, he will make the same things
seem good to the city at one time, and at another time the reverse
of good? 

Phaedr. That is true. 

Soc. Have we not heard of the Eleatic Palamedes (Zeno), who has an
art of speaking by which he makes the same things appear to his hearers
like and unlike, one and many, at rest and in motion? 

Phaedr. Very true.