---
assignee: Phaedr
end page: '480'
labels: ''
line end: Nor, until they adopt
line start: all the great arts
priority: major
related: ''
reporter: Soc
resolution: unresolved
start page: 478 (bottom)
status: ''
t_num: '270'
tbody: ''
tickettype: story
title: the virtue of analysis
---

Soc. All the great arts require discussion and high speculation about
the truths of nature; hence come loftiness of thought and completeness
of execution. And this, as I conceive, was the quality which, in 
addition
to his natural gifts, Pericles acquired from his intercourse with
Anaxagoras whom he happened to know. He was thus imbued with the higher
philosophy, and attained the knowledge of Mind and the negative of
Mind, which were favourite themes of Anaxagoras, and applied what
suited his purpose to the art of speaking. 

Phaedr. Explain. 

Soc. Rhetoric is like medicine. 

Phaedr. How so? 

Soc. Why, because medicine has to define the nature of the body and
rhetoric of the soul-if we would proceed, not empirically but 
scientifically,
in the one case to impart health and strength by giving medicine and
food in the other to implant the conviction or virtue which you desire,
by the right application of words and training. 

Phaedr. There, Socrates, I suspect that you are right. 

Soc. And do you think that you can know the nature of the soul 
intelligently
without knowing the nature of the whole? 

Phaedr. Hippocrates the Asclepiad says that the nature even of the body 
can only be understood as a whole.

Soc. Yes, friend, and he was right:-still, we ought not to be content 
with the name of Hippocrates, but to examine and see whether his 
argument agrees with his conception of nature.

Phaedr. I agree.

Soc. Then consider what truth as well as Hippocrates says about this or 
about any other nature. Ought we not to consider first whether that 
which we wish to learn and to teach is a simple or multiform thing, and 
if simple, then to enquire what power it has of acting or being acted 
upon in relation to other things, and if multiform, then to number the 
forms; and see first in the case of one of them, and then in. case of 
all of them, what is that power of acting or being acted upon which 
makes each and all of them to be what they are?

Phaedr. You may very likely be right, Socrates.

Soc. The method which proceeds without analysis is like the groping of 
a blind man. Yet, surely, he who is an artist ought not to admit of a 
comparison with the blind, or deaf. The rhetorician, who teaches his 
pupil to speak scientifically, will particularly set forth the nature 
of that being to which he addresses his speeches; and this, I conceive, 
to be the soul.

Phaedr. Certainly.

Soc. His whole effort is directed to the soul; for in that he seeks to 
produce conviction.

Phaedr. Yes.

Soc. Then clearly, Thrasymachus or any one else who teaches rhetoric in 
earnest will give an exact description of the nature of the soul; which 
will enable us to see whether she be single and same, or, like the 
body, multiform. That is what we should call showing the nature of the 
soul.

Phaedr. Exactly.

Soc. He will explain, secondly, the mode in which she acts or is acted 
upon.

Phaedr. True.

Soc. Thirdly, having classified men and speeches, and their kinds and 
affections, and adapted them to one another, he will tell the reasons 
of his arrangement, and show why one soul is persuaded by a particular 
form of argument, and another not.

Phaedr. You have hit upon a very good way.

Soc. Yes, that is the true and only way in which any subject can be set 
forth or treated by rules of art, whether in speaking or writing. But 
the writers of the present day, at whose feet you have sat, craftily, 
conceal the nature of the soul which they know quite well. Nor, until 
they adopt our method of reading and writing, can we admit that they 
write by rules of art?